---
title: A strong lineup for DConf 2024
layout: post
---
The D programming language continues progress nicely. One sign of that is the nice lineup of speakers at DConf in September. I've never gone (most have been in Europe) but they're always livestreamed. I committed to using D after seeing some of the videos from DConf posted on Reddit back in 2013. I don't actually remember many details, but the upcoming support of shared libraries, and the recognition by leadership of the importance of shared libraries, was exactly what I was looking for in a fast language. I've been using D heavily for more than a decade with no compelling reason to switch to anything else.

[A link to the schedule can be found here.](https://dconf.org/2024/index.html#schedule) Let's look at some of the topics:

- A new (less than one year old) build tool that maintains compatibility with Dub
- A way to easily avoid the garbage collector if you need to
- Task-based parallel programming
- Phobos 3
- Another build system
- A new garbage collector (two talks)
- Biology simulation
- Declarative programming
- C++ interoperability
- Phobos 3 range API
- Value Lifetimes and Move Semantics
- Dustmite
- Graphics programming

D not only continues to be healthy in terms of its core development. We've long had new releases of the compilers with more frequency than I care to see. This DConf is showing movement in two additional areas that we have not seen in the past: evolving the language without breaking everything, and building the ecosystem.