---
layout: post
title: Surveying Retirement Advice
---
Every two or three years, I'll go crazy with retirement planning. I'm back at it again. The big change from the last time is the explosion of YouTube retirement content.

In my earliest days of thinking about retirement, I paid attention to Suze Orman, mostly because she was on TV and back then we didn't have the internet we have today. YouTube didn't even exist. Almost always, after listening to her, I'd feel a sense of hopelessness when I thought about retirement. I'd literally have had to save my entire paycheck just to pull out a meager retirement at 75. At some point she had a segment on whether someone can afford to buy something. The required amount of savings and net worth to buy something were terrifying. I blocked retirement out of my mind for a long time because it was painful to even think about it. I knew I'd never be able to retire and I knew everyone else was saving incredible chunks of their income.

What fixed the problem was the realization that Suze Orman was completely and utterly full of crap. I did some calculations of my own and realized that there was no basis for the amounts of money she claimed we need at different ages in order to retire. I started to see people retire and I knew their financial situations - including my parents. Looking at my own expenses, my projected Social Security payments, the rate I was accumulating savings, and historical stock returns, retirement at 65 while maintaining my existing lifestyle would be easy. That was using a 3% rule I'd constructed before hearing of the 4% rule.

It shouldn't surprise you that I felt a sense of relief after running the numbers. I worried that maybe I was missing something if Suze Orman gave such different advice. I eventually concluded that there was a simple answer, and it was that she had no idea what she was talking about. This has been confirmed by some of her recent statements that you need a minimum of $5 million to retire, and that you shouldn't think of retiring before 70, both of which are crazy.

What I like about retirement YouTube is that there are lots of channels from people that have actually retired talking about their experiences. Others are run by CFPs that talk about actual cases. People can and do retire with less than a million dollars saved. $2 million is a healthy account to add on top of your Social Security. You can avoid the guys trying to make you depressed and instead listen to people that work with the numbers with many clients on a daily basis.

I want to close with a couple pieces of non-financial retirement advice I got (and I don't remember where they came from, or if I modified the advice). After thinking about them for a while, I no longer worry about how I'll spend my time in retirement. The answer was that I'll continue doing what I'm doing right now. I'll be doing less of the stuff I don't want to do and more of what I enjoy doing.

- If you cut back to 50% of your working hours, how would it change how you spend your time? The key is that you have to do half of *all* tasks you currently do at work. You get half of your working hours to spend doing anything you want. Only rule is that you have your current budget constraint. It was enjoyable thinking about such a scenario because I'd have large blocks of time to work on the things I think are important. I'd be able to work on the goals that motivated me to get into this profession in the first place. The main problem was that my list of things to do was *way too long* for the available hours. Going into the exercise, I assumed I'd be bored finishing my work week at noon on Wednesday.
- What would you do this week if you were retired? I looked at all the things I was going to try to do this week, then crossed off the items I didn't want or need to do. Once again, without adding anything like travel or golf to the list, only crossing things off my current list, it was clear I was overscheduled even as a fully retired person. The main problem with retirement is that there's not enough time in the day to do things you enjoy doing. I later came up with my own variant to make this even clearer. I use a weekly note to record the things I'm working on. When I put things in the note, I categorize them as things I'd do in retirement or not do. That's not the same as things I want to do and don't want to do. You have to do some things in retirement that you don't want to do. Making this kind of list clarifies what a typical week will actually look like. There's just SO MUCH STUFF on there that boredom or purpose will not be an issue.

While these were interesting exercises (I was planning to retire after 70 not long ago), the truth is that I have a long time until retirement. These exercises are purely academic at this stage. I shortened my expected retirement age to 65 after doing them. Even dropping those five years, there's still a long time to retirement, and I'm spending my time figuring out how to make those years more enjoyable.