---
layout: post
title: Reading and Writing Code in the LLM Age
---
There have been folks questioning whether we should still read and write code in 2026. (Examples: [here](https://antirez.com/news/169), [here](https://softwaredoug.com/blog/2026/07/09/write-code), [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZpK5PWX2YRM), and [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cw0uqtVx8qw)).

I could write many pages on this, but instead will give you only a short post.

At a high level, "should I still write code" and "should I still read code" are simply the wrong questions to ask. It's natural that a professional programmer would ask such questions given the powerful coding LLMs available now. But that doesn't mean they're the right questions to ask.

The first question to ask is "What are we trying to accomplish with this piece of software?" Are you a startup trying to knock out a largely standard web app before you run out of money? Are you a scientist writing code for a research project? Are you a hobbyist wanting to learn something new?

After you've defined what you're trying to do and how you measure success, you need to think about the optimal way to get your code. LLMs have changed nothing in this regard - you need to communicate with the computer so it knows what you want it to do. We have developed specific languages for humans to communicate our wants to the computer in a precise, efficient manner. We call those languages programming languages. Alternatively, we can use human language, but that tends to be an imprecise and inefficient way to communicate our intentions to a computer.

Over the years, we realized that we could automate much of what we were communicating to the computer. We have compilers, metaprogramming, libraries,syntactic sugar, first-class functions, and such. Many programmers in 2010 didn't even know the basics of memory management because there was no reason they should. The vast majority of the code in any project was automated. There was no reason to read or write it.

LLMs now exist and they can be used to automate a lot of the stuff that we don't want to do. Don't want to burn through your brain power getting the indexing on a 3-dimensional array right, and you don't have a library to do it for you? Good news. There's an LLM that will do it for you. Then there's the question of how you know it's done correctly. For something like the indexing on a 3-dimensional array, the communication burden and the difficulty level are such that the LLM will do it correctly, so you're probably okay not reading the code it writes for you unless this is mission-critical stuff.

What about bigger stuff? LLM usage is all "fill in the middle" in some sense. The question is how big that middle should be. Should you give it one prompt and wait hours for it to spit out a final product? I guess that depends on how good you are at writing prompts, how enjoyable it is to write project specifications in terms of a prompt, and how much testing you have to do to verify the final product is correct. Even if you trust the LLM to produce correct code, do you trust yourself to tell the LLM what you want so well that you can guarantee the output is correct?

You also have to ask yourself how much it costs to have the LLM do everything itself versus having it fill in the middle at a smaller level. Someone with programming experience can at extremely low cost come up with an outline of what should be done. Is it really worth it to outsource *everything*? Not likely, at least for someone with an intermediate understanding of programming. The highest level of the outline is the lowest cost to the programmer and the highest cost for the LLM.

You also need to keep in mind the cost of maintenance. If you have a large blob of vibe coded crap, you'll have to pay the tokens for every future change and bug fix you make. The better you understand the code, and the lower the level of the program at which you are using the LLM to fill in the middle, the less you rely on an LLM for maintenance. If you're a programmer at a company with deep pockets, what you care about is making your life easy, so you don't care about any of this. For the rest of us, it's something that we need to consider carefully.

A final question you need to ask is how much you value writing the code your way. Do you want it written the way you think, in the way you find most readable, or do you not value that at all? I personally prefer a specific coding style. LLMs are no different from any other writing they do in this respect. Some folks send me AI generated block of text emails. I write all my email messages by hand. This is not to say you should write all of your code by hand if you want a particular style, but rather that you need to have the LLM write smaller chunks of code the more you want to control the style. You may even have to rewrite some of the LLM code.

Let me repeat the claim from the beginning of this post that you're not asking the right questions if you ask whether to write and read code in the age of LLMs. The "correct" quantities of those two variables are equilibrium outcomes that depend on the project. It seems extremely unlikely that there are a lot of cases where we have a corner solution where the optimal quantity of both variables is zero. It seems implausible to me that the use of a less precise language dominates the use of a more precise language. 